# Remote Sensing B

See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.

1. DESCRIPTION: Participants will demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles of remote sensing and interpret imagery, data, and maps related to human interactions with land on Earth.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2			
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
			
CALCULATOR: Class II
2. EVENT PARAMETERS:
a. Each team may bring one three-ring binder of any size containing information in any form and from any source attached using the available rings. Sheet protectors, lamination, tabs and labels are permitted. If the event features a rotation through a series of laboratory stations where the participants interact with samples, specimens, or displays; no paper may be removed from the binder throughout the event.
b. Each team may bring two protractors, two rulers, and two Class II calculators.
3. THE COMPETITION: Participants will be given one or more tasks presented as an exam and/or timed stations. The event will consist of questions and activities testing concepts related to the collection and use of remote sensing data to observe and study human interactions with the Earth. Questions will address the following topics:
a. Remote sensing concepts (25-35% of total points)
i. Properties of light: electromagnetic spectrum, reflection, refraction, absorption, scattering, polarization, irradiance/radiance
ii. Types of sensors, limited to: active vs. passive, UV, visible light, infrared, radar
iii. Types of satellite orbits and their purposes, limited to: low earth, medium earth, high earth, polar/ non-polar, geostationary, geosynchronous
iv. Image characteristics: spatial, temporal, radiometric (calculations limited to signal-to-noise ratio/ sensitivity), spectral
v. Instrumentation, limited to: scanning systems, multispectral imaging systems, optical and infrared imagers, radiometers, radar altimetry
b. Interpretation and analysis of remote sensing images and data sets (65-75% of total points), limited to the types of sensors listed in 3.a.ii., from the following satellites only: different spectral combinations from Landsat 5-9 (TM, ETM, OLI), Sentinel-1A/1B, Sentinel-2A/2B, Terra (limited to: MODIS, ASTER), Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM). Questions will focus on the following:
i. Fundamentals of mapping as applied to topographic maps, satellite maps, aerial photographs, and other maps generated by remotely sensed data
(1) Marginal information
(2) Symbology and cartographic design: location, scale, legend, symbols, contours
(3) Measurements, limited to:
(a) Distance between features, perimeter, area
(b) Azimuths and bearings
(c) Latitude and longitude in degrees, minutes, seconds, and decimal degrees
(d) Altitude and elevation
ii. Land usage and monitoring in relation to society and human impact
(1) Identification and classification of physical phenomena, including but not limited to
(a) Absorption and scattering by aerosols and their effect on data collection
(b) Refraction, albedo, surface temperature, reflectance, and other properties of natural and engineered materials and their uses for classifying land areas
(c) Elevation or subsidence changes of buildings over time using radar altimetry
(d) Vegetation changes (e.g., forests, agriculture) using multispectral images over time
(e) Geohazards, limited to: volcanoes, landslides, flooding, wildfires
(2) Land Cover Classification Systems
(a) Supervised and Unsupervised classification maps
(b) National Land Cover Database (NLCD/CONUS) Land Cover Change Index
(c) Implications for habitat loss, land cover change, urbanization, deforestation, damage assessment
4. SCORING:
a. High score wins.
b. Points will be awarded for the quality and accuracy of responses.
c. Selected questions may be used as tiebreakers.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
This event is sponsored by the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society (GRSS).

©2026 - B47
